Sample Level II CFA Program  
Item -Set Questions  
 
TOPIC: ETHICAL AND PROFESSIONAL STANDARDS  
TOTAL POINT VALUE OF THIS QUESTION SET IS 12 POINTS  
 
Edgar Somer, CFA, was recently hired as a portfolio manager at Karibe Investment 
Management. Somer previously worked at a rival firm where he produced an average annual 
return of 11% using a small -cap value strategy.  
On his first day at Karibe, the firm asks Somer to approve marketing materials that present the 
following performance disclosures.  
• Text wh ich states:  “Somer has generated average annual returns of 11%”  
• The 3 -year performance of a composite of Karibe client accounts that follow a similar 
small -cap value strategy  
• A disclosure that the assumptions and calculations underlying the returns presented are 
publicly available on Karibe’s public website  
To maintain relationships with clients and to attract prospective clients, Somer is active on 
social media. He posts a lin k to a news story about a famous athlete who recently paid 
substantial tax penalties after failing to properly report investment gains. In addition to the link 
Somer writes the comment: “A client of mine had similar gains, but because I kept proper 
records  he faced no penalties. #HireAProfessional”. Some responses to the post suggest that 
readers mistakenly believe the athlete is Somer’s client. Somer does not post a clarifying 
comment.  
Somer develops a new quantitative investment strategy that he describes  in marketing 
materials. The description states that “the strategy is based on eight proven fundamental and 
technical factors, including well -known factors such as value and momentum as well as certain 
proprietary factors that have been back -tested. The st rategy includes a dynamic weighting 
component to adjust the amount allocated to each factor based on prevailing market 
conditions.” The materials also highlight risks such as “the possibility that the model or its 
underlying factors may not work out of sam ple,” and “because the weight placed on various 
factors is dynamic, it may not be suitable for clients who seek steady exposure to certain 
factors.” One of Somer’s clients agrees to use this strategy. When preparing the first 
performance report for this cl ient, Somer discovers a coding error that reversed the client’s 
weightings assigned to the value and momentum factors.  
Prior to joining Karibe, Somer purchased shares in a small -cap technology firm for his personal 
portfolio. When he started his new role S omers disclosed the position, which had quadrupled in 
value since the initial purchase and represented more than 5% of his personal holdings. He had 

no intention to sell the shares and he recommended them to clients at Karibe, to whom he 
disclosed his owne rship. After the successful launch of a new product resulted in additional 
large gains in the shares, Somer now recommends that clients place limit orders when 
purchasing the shares. Though he remains bullish on the stock he is concerned about the size of 
his personal position, which is now more than 15% of his portfolio. One of his clients recently 
placed a limit order at $50 per share, which represents the highest bid in the market. The 
lowest offer is $52. Somer considers filling the client’s order with some of his own shares at the 
$50 bid price.  
 
1. To best comply with the CFA Institute Standards of Professional Conduct (the Standards) 
related to performance presentation, Somer should modify the:  
 
A. text regarding Somer’s investment returns.  
B. presentation of the performance for Karibe’s representative composite.  
C. content of the disclosure statement related to assumptions and calculations.  
2. Does Somer’s social media post result in a violation of the Standards?  
 
A. No. 
B. Yes, he violates the standard re lated to preservation of confidentiality . 
C. Yes, he violates the standard related to communication with clients and prospective 
clients . 
3. When preparing the marketing materials for the quantitative strategy, did Somer comply 
with the standard related to commu nication with clients and prospective clients?  
 
A. Yes. 
B. No, because he did not identify the risk of coding errors . 
C. No, because he did not describe the investment process in detail . 
4. If he fills the client’s order for shares of the technology firm, would Somer violate the 
standard related to priority of transactions?  
 
A. No. 
B. Yes, because the client would be disadvantaged by the trade . 
C. Yes, because he would benefit personally from a trade undertaken for a client . 
 
 
 
 
 

TOPIC: FINANCIAL STATEMENT ANALYSIS  
TOTAL POINT VALUE OF THIS QUESTION SET IS 12 POINTS  
 
Paris Rousseau, a wealth manager at a US -based investment management firm, is meeting with 
a new client. The client has asked Rousseau to make recommendations regarding his portfolio’s 
exposure to liquid  alternative investments, specifically publicly traded real estate investments 
and commodity futures.  
Publicly Traded Real Estate  
Rousseau believes that the client should increase his portfolio's allocation to publicly traded 
real estate through equity REI Ts. She collects financial information for the three office REITs 
presented in Exhibit 1.  
Exhibit 1  
 Autier REIT  Bissorte REIT  Chambon 
REIT  
Current market price per share ($)  161.58  137.86  42.20  
Last 12 -months net operating income (NOI  in $ millions)  1,085.80  1,826.12  431.79  
Last 12 -months funds from operations (FFO in $ millions)  877.42  1,085.84  328.79  
Cash and equivalents ($ millions)  80.38  140.63  4.25  
Accounts receivable and prepaid/other assets ($ millions)  109.30  504.32  11.35  
Non -cash (straight -line) rent adjustment ($ millions)  20.55  0.00  5.45  
Recurring maintenance -type capital expenditures ($ millions)  54.52  75.85  8.75  
Leasing costs & tenant improvement allowances ($ millions)  19.34  29.23  13.34  
Total debt outstanding and other liabilities ($ millions)  7,049.29  12,236.03  2,222.97  
Shares outstanding (millions)  115.15  154.62  146.76  
Office sub -sector forecast 12 -month growth in NOI and FFO  1.50%  
Office sub -sector average capitalization rate  5.75%  
Office sub -sector average P/FFO multiple  20x 
 
Rousseau computes adjusted funds from operations (AFFO) per share and net asset value per 
share (NAVPS) for each REIT in Exhibit 1.  
Rousseau also considers recommending OceanFront Partners, a condominium devel oper 
operating as a publicly -traded real estate operating company (REOC), for inclusion in the 
client’s portfolio. In a recent analyst conference call, the CEO of OceanFront announced plans 

to significantly increase the firm’s retention ratio to fund sever al new acquisitions and 
development projects. Specifically, the CEO explained that OceanFront recently purchased 
several vacant lots in a popular beach -front community following a zoning change which allows 
for construction of high -rise condominiums.  
Commo dity Futures  
Rousseau notes that the client’s portfolio currently has a futures position in gold. The client’s 
gold futures contracts are nearing expiration. Rousseau notes that gold futures are currently in 
contango, and she recommends rolling forward the  client’s position while maintaining the same 
dollar exposure in gold futures.  
 
5. The AFFO per share for Autier REIT over the last 12 -months is closest to: 
A. $6.80.  
B. $7.16.  
C. $8.43 . 
 
6. The NAVPS for Bissorte REIT is closest  to: 
 
A. $129.34.  
B. $130.43.  
C. $133.51.  
 
7. The most  appropriate method for estimating the intrinsic value of  OceanFront  is based on:  
 
A. P/AFFO.  
B. net asset value.  
C. discounted cash flow.  
 
8. If the client implements Rousseau’s recommendation, the number of gold futures contracts 
in his portfolio  will most l ikely : 
 
A. decrease.  
B. stay the same.  
C. increase.  
  

Answers to Sample Level II Item -Set Questions  
 
1. To best comply with the CFA Institute Standards of Professional Conduct (the Standards) 
related to performance presentation, Somer should modify the:  
 
A. text regarding Somer’s investment returns.  
B. presentation of the performance for Karibe’s representative composite.  
C. content of the disclosure statement related to assumptions and calculations.  
 
Answer: A  
 
A is correct because Somer’s returns are not clearly explained as being generated at his prior 
firm. If a firm is not claiming GIPS compliance, “Members and candidates can also meet their 
obligations under Standard III(D) b y including disclosures that fully explain the performance 
being reported .” 
 
B is incorrect because the marketing materials present the performance of a composite of 
similar portfolios.  
 
C is incorrect because the materials direct prospective clients to the website where a full 
disclosure of the assumptions and calculations are ava ilable  
 
2. Does Somer’s social media post result in a violation of the Standards?  
 
A. No. 
B. Yes, he violates the standard related to preservation of confidentiality . 
C. Yes, he violates the standard related to communication with clients and prospective clients . 
 
Answer: A  
 
A is correct because Somer did not reveal the identity of his client (Standard III(E)). The context 
of the comment (he helped his client avoid penalties) contradicts the mistaken conclusion of 
the readers of the social media post (the athlete in  question had to pay penalties so obviously 
was not his client). He also does not violate the standard related to communication (Standard 
V(B)) because it applies to 1) disclosure of the format and general principles of the investment 
process; 2) significa nt limitations and risks of the investment process; 3) identifying important 
factors for their analysis and recommendations; and 4) distinguishing between fact and opinion 
in investment analyses and recommendations. His post did not relate to any of these and thus 
is not a potential violation of the standard.  
 
B is incorrect because Somer does not violate the standard related to confidentiality because 
the athlete in the news story is not his client, and the information that he helped his own client 

avoid t ax penalties by keeping good records does not provide enough information to disclose 
the client’s identity.  
 
C is incorrect because Somer does not violate the standard related to communication (Standard 
V(B)) because it applies to 1) disclosure of the form at and general principles of the investment 
process; 2) significant limitations and risks of the investment process; 3) identifying important 
factors for their analysis and recommendations; and 4) distinguishing between fact and opinion 
in investment analy ses and recommendations. His post did not relate to any of these and thus 
is not a potential violation of the standard, but certain candidates and/or exam team writers 
who think that communications with clients includes a duty to correct everyone who 
misun derstands you may choose this answer.  
3. When preparing the marketing materials for the quantitative strategy, did Somer comply 
with the standard related to communication with clients and prospective clients?  
 
A. Yes. 
B. No, because he did not identify the risk of coding errors . 
C. No, because he did not describe the investment process in detail . 
 
Answer: A  
 
A is correct because he did not violate Standard V(B). With respect to informing clients of the 
investment process, the guidance stipulates that when explaining th e process one “need not 
describe the investment system in detail… but must inform clients of (the) basic process and 
logic.” The explanation of Somer’s process as factor -based with weights dynamically allocated 
meets this criterion. Regarding risk identifi cation, “members and candidates cannot be 
expected to disclose risks they are unaware of at the time…. Having no knowledge of a risk or 
limitation that subsequently triggers a loss may reveal a deficiency in the diligence and 
reasonable basis… but may not reveal a breach of Standard V(B).”  
 
B is incorrect because “members and candidates cannot be expected to disclose risks they are 
unaware of at the time…. Having no knowledge of a risk or limitation that subsequently triggers 
a loss may reveal a deficiency in the diligence and reasonable basis… but may not reveal a 
breach of Standard V(B).”  
 
C is incorrect because when explaining the process one “need not describe the investment 
system in detail… but must inform clients of (the) basic process and logic.” (Example 1 p. 141) 
The explanation of Somer’s process as factor -based with weights dynamically allocated meets 
this criterion.  
4. If he fills the client’s order for shares of the technology firm, would Somer violate the 
standard related to priority of  transactions?  
 
A. No. 

B. Yes, because the client would be disadvantaged by the trade . 
C. Yes, because he would benefit personally from a trade undertaken for a client . 
 
Answer: C  
 
C is correct because the guidance for Standard VI(B) specifies that “nothing is inherently 
unethical about… making money from personal investments as long as (1) the client is not 
disadvantaged by the trade, (2) the investment professional does not persona lly benefit from 
trades undertaken for clients, and (3) the investment professional complies with applicable 
regulatory requirements.” In this case, Somer would personally benefit from a trade 
undertaken for a client by realizing a large gain and reducing the portfolio risk arising from his 
large position, which results in several potential conflicts of interest. At a minimum he would 
need to disclose to the client that he was filling the order from his own account and seek 
permission from Karibe to do so.  
 
A is incorrect because Somer would personally benefit from a trade undertaken for a client by 
realizing a large gain and reducing the portfolio risk arising from his large position, which results 
in several potential conflicts of interest. At a minimum h e would need to disclose to the client 
that he was filling the order from his own account and seek permission from Karibe to do so.  
 
B is incorrect because the client is not disadvantaged by the trade (and in fact gets the order 
filled at a discount to th e prevailing market price ). 
 
 
 
5. The AFFO per share for Autier REIT over the last 12 -months is closest to: 
A. $6.80.  
B. $7.16.  
C. $8.43  
 
Answer: A  
  
A is correct because "AFFO is most often defined as FFO adjusted to remove any non -cash rent 
and to subtract maintenance -type capital expenditures and leasing costs (including leasing 
agent's commissions and tenants' improvement allowances)" The computation for Autier REIT 
is as follows:  
Last 12 -Months Funds From Operations (FFO)  $877.42 million  
     Less: Non -Cash Rents  20.55 million  
     Less:  Recurring CapEx (Maintenance)  54.52 million  
     Less:  Leasing Cost & Tenant Allowances  19.34 million  

Adjusted Funds From Operations (AFFO)  $783.01 million  
To arrive at Adjusted Funds From  Operations (AFFO) per share, divide AFFO by the number of 
shares outstanding (115.15 million).  
Correct AFFO per share  = $783.01 / 115.15 = $6.7999 ≈ $6.80  
B is incorrect . In this case non -cash rents get added to FFO instead of subtracting them . 
C is incorrect . In this case the adjustments are added instead of subtracted .  
6. The NAVPS for Bissorte REIT is closest to:  
 
A. $129.34.  
B. $130.43.  
C. $133.51.  
 
Answer: C  
 
C is correct because "NAVPS is the difference between a real estate company’s assets and its 
liabil ities, all taken at current market values instead of accounting book values, divided by the 
number of shares outstanding" The Net Asset Value (NAV) for Bissorte REIT is correctly 
computed as:  
Net Operating Income (Last 12 Months)  $1,826.12 million  
     Less: Non -Cash Rents  0.00 million  
     Times: (1+ Forecast growth in NOI)  x 1.015  
Estimated Next 12 -Months Cash NOI  $1,853.51 million  
     Divide: Capitalization Rate  / 0.0575  
Estimated Value of Operating Real Estate  $32,234.99 million  
     Plus: Cash and Equivalents  140.63 million  
     Plus: A/R and Prepaids/Other Assets  504.32 million  
     Less: Total Debt & Other Liabilities  12,236.03 million  
Net Asset Value (NAV)  $20,643.91 million  
The candidate then divides the NAV computed above by the number of shares Bissorte REIT has 
outstanding (154.62) to arrive at the correct NAVPS.  
Correct NAVPS = $20,643.91 / 154.62 = $133.51  

A is incorrect .  In this case the current assets of "Cash and Equivalents" and "Accounts 
Receivable and Prepaid/Other Assets" in the computation of NAV  are not added back.  
B is incorrect . In this case NAV is computed using the next 12 -months forecast  NOI, not last 12 -
months NOI as presented in the exhibit.  
7. The most appropriate method for estimating the int rinsic value of  OceanFront  is based on:  
 
A. P/AFFO.  
B. net asset value.  
C. Discounted cash flow.  
 
Answer: B  
 
B is correct because net asset value (NAV) explicitly considers "land held for future 
development" and is not affected by changes in dividends. As noted in the case,  "In a recent 
analyst conference call the CEO of OceanFront announced plans to increase the firm’s retention 
ratio to fund several new acquisitions and development projects. Specifically, he explained that 
OceanFront recently acquired sev eral vacant lots in a popular beach -front  community following 
a zoning change which allows for construction of high -rise condominiums." Thus, OceanFront 
has recently acquired "land held for future development" and the transactions are recent. This 
combined  with the fact that dividends are being lowered to begin development of these 
properties makes NAV the best choice for estimating OceanFront's intrinsic value.   
 
A is incorrect because "applying a multiple to FFO or AFFO may not capture the intrinsic value  of 
all real estate assets held by the REIT or REOC; for example, land parcels and empty buildings may 
not currently produce income and hence do not contribute to FFO (and AFFO ) but  have value ”. 
C is incorrect because the discounted cash flow (DCF) approac h is most appropriate and 
applicable when REITs and REOCs "return a significant portion of their income to their investors." 
In this case, "In a recent analyst conference call the CEO of OceanFront announced plans to 
significantly increase the firm’s reten tion ratio to fund several new acquisitions and development 
projects ”. 
 
8. If the client implements Rousseau’s recommendation, the number of gold futures contracts 
in his portfolio  will most likely:  
 
A. decrease.  
B. stay the same.  
C. increase.  
 
Answer: A  
 

A is correct because "gold futures are currently in contango" and will require buying  fewer 
contracts to meet Rousseau's goal of "maintaining the  same dollar exposure in gold futures." In 
the readings: "A portfolio may require buying more far contracts tha n the near contracts being 
sold. Investors can observe this scenario if backwardation is driving the shape of the commodity 
futures price curve." In the opposite case, if the futures price curve shape is being driven by 
contango –with a higher futures price  in the far contract –this scenario will require the purchase 
of fewer commodity contracts than in the near position.  
B is incorrect  because "gold futures are current ly in contango" and will require buying  fewer 
contracts to meet Rousseau's goal of "mainta ining the  same dollar exposure in gold futures." The 
number of required contracts would only remain the same if the price of the expiring near 
contract is equal to the price of the far contract the investor is rolling into.  
 
C is incorrect  because "gold f utures are current ly in contango" and will require buying  fewer 
contracts to meet Rousseau's goal of "maintaining the  same dollar exposure in gold futures," not 
more contracts. The number of required contracts would only increase if the futures market was 
in backwardation.  
 
 

